
===== PAGE 1 =====
Shaping the Elements:
Curvenet Animation Controls in Pixar’s Elemental
Duc Nguyen
duc@pixar.com
Pixar Animation Studios
Jeremie Talbot
jtalbot@pixar.com
Pixar Animation Studios
William Sheffler
sheffler@pixar.com
Pixar Animation Studios
Mark Hessler
mhessler@pixar.com
Pixar Animation Studios
Kurt Fleischer
kurt@pixar.com
Pixar Animation Studios
Fernando de Goes
fernando@pixar.com
Pixar Animation Studios
Figure 1: Our new shaping rig provides fine animation controls driven by sparse and modular curvenets that produce detail-
preserving surface deformation. From left to right, the face articulation is adjusted sequentially by posing curvenets over the
head, lips, eyes, and hair of Wade, the water character from Pixar’s feature film Elemental. ©Pixar.
ABSTRACT
We present a new shaping rig for authoring layers of animation
control that facilitate surface editing in shot work. Our approach
expands the curvenet rigging technology [de Goes et al. 2022] by
introducing new tools that auto-generate a surface-aligned direct
manipulator per curvenet knot. As a result, we obtain a mapping
from animation controls into curvenet adjustments relative to the
deforming surface with minimal setup. We showcase our curvenet
shaping rig using results from Pixar’s feature film Elemental (2023).
ACM Reference Format:
Duc Nguyen, Jeremie Talbot, William Sheffler, Mark Hessler, Kurt Fleischer,
and Fernando de Goes. 2023. Shaping the Elements: Curvenet Animation
Controls in Pixar’s Elemental . In Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics
and Interactive Techniques Conference Talks (SIGGRAPH ’23 Talks), August
06-10, 2023. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 2 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/
3587421.3595415
1
INTRODUCTION
The characters of Pixar’s feature film Elemental (2023) are per-
sonifications of the classical elements of water, fire, and air. To
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
SIGGRAPH ’23 Talks, August 06-10, 2023, Los Angeles, CA, USA
© 2023 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-0143-6/23/08.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3587421.3595415
capture the fluidity of these elements, our animation team envi-
sioned early on production the need for shaping controls that refine
the character articulation within the shot context. Unfortunately,
existing techniques to create shot-based animation controls are lim-
ited to sculpting and transient rigs, which are often hand-crafted
and intricate to setup. In particular, our animators sought a sparse
representation that can express subtle shape adjustments, while
being easily keyframed and constrained to the deforming surface.
In this work, we present a new shaping rig that provides fine
animation controls with minimal setup. Our approach builds on the
curvenet rigging technology introduced by de Goes et al. [2022].
By exploiting curvenets, animators have access to modular curve
controls expressing surface profiles and layered over the character
articulation agnostic to the underlying rig or surface tessellation.
Additionally, we devised a new deformer that auto-orients direct
manipulators attached to curvenet knots, thus defining animation
scopes for rotates, translates, and scales relative to the deforming
surface free of any extra rigging setup. Equipped with these tools,
the animation team in Elemental was able to edit and keyframe
character poses with fine shaping controls, while still producing
detail-preserving deformations.
2
CURVENETS & PROFILE MOVER
We start by reviewing the concepts of curvenets and Profile Mover
on which our work is based. We point the reader to [de Goes et al.
2022] for more technical details. Curvenets are rigging primitives
that embody curves with shared points depicting characteristic
profiles of the surface to be deformed. Unlike cages or patches,
curvenets can represent multiple surface parts with no modeling or

===== PAGE 2 =====
SIGGRAPH ’23 Talks, August 06-10, 2023, Los Angeles, CA, USA
Nguyen et al.
meshing restrictions (see, e.g., Figure 1). Artists construct curvenets
by drawing Bézier splines near the character surface and then ar-
ticulate their knots and tangents using traditional rigging tools. As
a result, curvenets simplify the rig with orders of magnitude fewer
authored points, while separating the articulation setup from the
surface tessellation. To compute the surface deformation, curvenets
are accompanied by a custom deformer, the Profile Mover, that inter-
polates the curvenet deformation over the surface mesh. At its core,
the Profile Mover implements a mesh cutting algorithm that binds
curvenets to the surface mesh, followed by a mesh optimization
that reconstructs surface details conforming to the posed curvenets.
The curvenet technology was first deployed in Pixar’s Turning
Red (2022) for articulating both the body and the face of the Panda
characters. Since the Panda rigs were entirely based on curvenets,
animators quickly extended the curvenet setup into a shot-based
interface for additional animation shaping, in which curvenet knots
were sculpted interactively while still triggering the same Profile
Mover. However, in our original implementation, adding animation
controls over curvenets required a manual stitching setup with
artists creating and fitting handles to the location and orientation
of each curvenet knot. Despite this troublesome setup, curvenet
animation controls had a significant impact in shot work, replacing
tedious mesh sculpting with a few curvenet adjustments.
3
SHAPING THROUGH CURVENETS
To ease the authoring of shaping rigs in Elemental, we designed
a new workflow for promoting curvenets into animation controls
that bypasses the need of any manual setup. We first enabled the
superposition of the Profile Mover deformations on arbitrary rig
configurations. To this end, we made a small modification to our
Figure 2: Our curvenet animation controls were used to shape
the fire character Ember and a prop molten glass asset. The
top image illustrates the deformation generated by Curvenet
Adjustments with knots displayed as purple spheres, while
the bottom image shows the final render. ©Disney/Pixar.
deformation algorithm that accounts for different projection and
rest poses of the input surface mesh. The projection pose is set
to a neutral surface shape (e.g., T-pose) onto which curvenets are
bounded, while the rest pose represents the result of any surface
deformation performed before the curvenet articulation. Since the
projection pose is persistent throughout the animation, we can
precompute the curvenet binding only once, thus keeping the com-
putational cost of Profile Mover intact. Additionally, we ensure that
curvenets track the character animation by warping their knots
from the projection to the surface rest pose on every frame.
Our shaping workflow is centered on the Curvenet Adjustment,
which is a new primitive that defines the animation scope associ-
ated with any curvenet knot chosen to be exposed to animation. By
default, Curvenet Adjustments have built-in direct manipulators for
translate, rotate, and scale that are activated when the adjustment
is selected. This primitive also has configurable attributes allow-
ing tangent points to be attached to a parent knot and animated
by tangent translate controls. Lastly, we developed the Curvenet
Adjuster Mover as a new deformer that positions the knots and
tangents of the curvenets by evaluating the animation controls
encoded through the Curvenet Adjustment primitives. Importantly,
this deformer converts the animation controls into world-space
transformations by computing an orientation for every curvenet
knot. To achieve this goal, we identify a curvenet intersection as
any knot shared by three or more curves, and then estimate the ro-
tation that best fits the tangents incident to each intersection from
the original curvenet shape to its warped pose. For the remaining
knots, we compute the parallel transport of the rotation matrices
from every nearby intersection. When a knot lies in between two in-
tersections, we further blend the transported rotations weighted by
the inverse distance between the knot and each intersection. This
computation occurs at deformation time and takes into account the
result of every deformer that has fired on the curvenet before the
Curvenet Adjuster Mover, resulting in an orientation that is relative
to the deformed surface. Using these auto-generated orientations,
we can expose surface-relative curvenet controls to animators with-
out any manual setup, while still executing the Profile Mover to
propagate curvenet edits into surface deformations.
4
RESULTS
We implemented our curvenet shaping rig in Presto and integrated
it to every fire, water, and air character in Elemental. The supplemen-
tal video presents interactive sessions demonstrating our curvenet
tools in action refining the character performance. Figure 1 break-
downs a series of curvenet adjustments applied to a face expression.
Notice how these curvenets were authored with different layouts
fitted to surface profiles, including curves resembling coarse cages
(e.g., head and hair) versus partially connected and floating curves
(eg., lips and eyes). In addition to character surfaces, our curvenet
animation controls were also employed to manipulate the shape of
props within shot sequences, thus avoiding the need of any custom
prop rigging. Figure 2 shows the result of our curvenet tools used
to animate a character body as well as a molten glass.
REFERENCES
Fernando de Goes, William Sheffler, and Kurt Fleischer. 2022. Character Articulation
through Profile Curves. ACM Trans. Graph. 41, 4, Article 139 (jul 2022), 14 pages.
