
===== PAGE 1 =====
Pixar’s Inside Out 2: Character Rig Challenges and Techniques
CHRISTIAN HOFFMAN, MICHAEL NIEVES, JACOB SPEIRS, and BRENDA LIN ZHANG, Pixar
Animation Studios, USA
The characters team on Pixar’s Inside Out 2 shares some of the technical & design challenges on our character rigs and presents the
techniques used to solve them.
ACM Reference Format:
Christian Hoffman, Michael Nieves, Jacob Speirs, and Brenda Lin Zhang. 2024. Pixar’s Inside Out 2: Character Rig Challenges and
Techniques. In Special Interest Group on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques Conference Talks (SIGGRAPH Talks ’24), July 27 -
August 01, 2024. ACM, New York, NY, USA, 3 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3641233.3664342
1
JOY’S EYELIDS & EYE AUTO GAZE CORRECTION
Fig. 1. © Disney/Pixar
Joy’s iconic large eyes pose both artistic and technical hurdles in character design. Conven-
tionally, our characters’ eyelids feature an inside and an outside corner connecting the upper
and lower lids. However, during the production of Inside Out we encountered a significant
challenge: whenever Joy’s lids were halfway open, her eyes appeared smaller rather than
partially shut. Our solution on Inside Out 2 was to equip Joy with four lid corners — two for
the upper lid and two for the lower lid. We will present the unique technique we used that
ultimately gave Animation the ability to choose any position along the lid edge’s topology
for the corners of both the upper and lower lids.
On the original Inside Out, Animation spent a lot of time polishing the eye directions
on the larger eyed characters to make it appear as if both eyes were looking in the same
direction. The curvature of the eyeballs would often make the eye gaze appear different,
especially as the eyes are angled away from camera and the amount of exposed iris/pupil
was diminished or wrapped around the horizon of the eyeball. We will discuss the cheats we
explored to unify the character gaze direction, some that are relative to the eye and eyelid
shapes themselves, and others that are computed relative to the camera. In addition, we will
talk about the process of preventing the pupils from becoming obscured under the eyelids when the neutral eye position
is biased with minimal space on one side of the eye and significantly more on the opposing side.
2
CURVENET USAGE
Hand Curvenet Rig. Most of our character’s hands in Inside Out 2 are traditional hands — four fingers and a thumb.
We like to share topology and weighting where possible but historically any character with unique topology has to
be rigged from scratch. We wanted to change that. Over the past few productions Pixar has been developing new
articulation tools called curvenet and Profile Mover. These tools allow us to deform our subdivision surfaces completely
independent of shape or topology. On Inside Out 2, we used these tools to create, for the first time at Pixar, a fully
Permission to make digital or hard copies of part or all of this work for personal or classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not
made or distributed for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation on the first page. Copyrights for third-party
components of this work must be honored. For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
© 2024 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
Manuscript submitted to ACM
1

===== PAGE 2 =====
SIGGRAPH Talks ’24, July 27 - August 01, 2024, Denver, CO, USA
Porter et al.
Fig. 2. © Disney/Pixar
articulated hand curvenet as a shareable rig. The result was fully rigged hands for all of our characters, out-of-the-box,
without doing any rigging work on the geometry, regardless of shape or topology. We would like to share our setup,
the results, and discuss the next steps for the use-case.
Shape-N-Bake. On Inside Out 2, we created a new workflow that uses curvenets as a shaping tool instead of a
deformation tool. This gives the artist the option to interface with sparse point data on a curvenet but then to bake
the shapes down into our traditional subdivision deformation stack. Curvenet enables artists to manipulate character
articulation shapes with sparse points, particularly useful for maintaining volumes in various directional spaces. The
Shape-n-bake approach leverages the strengths of curvenet while circumventing the weakness of the sparse topology
(such as candy wrapping with twists) to create corrective shapes more efficiently.
Character & cloth rigging. The body deformations for some of the new characters were rigged using a curvenet and
Profile Mover. There were also some circumstances where we applied the sparse point rigging approach to garments.
While most characters typically don’t require extensive cloth rigging, specific control over some of the garments was
needed in shots due to their importance of the character’s personality. This required fine-tuning aspects of the costume
to enhance the character’s performance and by using curvenets we were able to provide those controls to Animation.
3
CRAFTING ANXIETY’S EXPRESSIVE MOUTH: INNOVATIVE RIGGING SOLUTIONS
Fig. 3. © Disney/Pixar
Inside Out 2 introduces Anxiety, a character with a unique design akin to a cloth
puppet, demanding specialized mouth rigging setups for flexible and precise
control in Animation. Anxiety’s design required a rigging solution that could
accommodate her unique features. Our team devised a mouth corner rig consisting
of three layers of controls. The first manipulates the outer silhouette of the mouth
and face, allowing for broad adjustments to shape and expression. The second
focuses on moving the mouth corners within the face silhouette, and the third is
dedicated to refining the outer silhouette without affecting the teeth placement.
To achieve the desired wavy lip shapes, we added additional lip controls, providing
nine sections on each lip. This enables animators to establish the base wavy shape.
Additionally, we introduced a curvenet setup on both the lips and the head for
detailed polishing, allowing control over the entire facial shape and thickness
between the lips and face silhouette. This grants animators flexibility in shaping
Anxiety’s facial expressions, enabling them to convey a wide range of emotions with precision. In developing the teeth
setup for Anxiety, we used curves wrapped around the lips and constrained each tooth to follow the contours of the
lips. Individual controls were implemented on each tooth to enable animators to toggle the constraint on or off, slide
2

===== PAGE 3 =====
Pixar’s Inside Out 2: Character Rig Challenges and Techniques
SIGGRAPH Talks ’24, July 27 - August 01, 2024, Denver, CO, USA
the teeth along the curve, and pose them separately. The teeth constraint setup remained unaffected by the polishing
curvenet. These rigging solutions provided animators with a comprehensive toolkit, ranging from rough adjustments to
fine detailing, empowering them to craft dynamic and precise mouth movements that perfectly complement Anxiety’s
wide array of facial expressions.
3
